Managing ansible-core and Collection Dependencies (#46)
ansible-collections/cloud-content-handbook: Proposals/core_collection_dependency.md

        
    - PR-based testing should focus on the latest stable and development versions.
        
    - Weekly scheduled tests should cover a broader range of supported ansible-core versions to catch regressions.

3. **Upstream testing Matrix**

  Different types of tests may target different subsets of the ansible-core versions based on their purpose and cost:

 | Test Type   | When Run                      | Collection Branch                                                                                        | ansible-core Versions                                                                 |
 | ----------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
 | Sanity      | PRs, nightly or periodic jobs | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for nightly or periodic jobs$^1$ | `devel` and all supported versions in `requires_ansible`                              |

>  | Unit        | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all supported versions in `requires_ansible` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 | Unit        | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest|
```

>  | Integration | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all supported versions in `requires_ansible` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 | Integration | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest|
```

>  <sup>1</sup> _latest major release of the collection and two prior versions_

Author: No, It should be the last 2 major releases of the collections. I will fix this.

 **Example Scenario :**

 - When managing multiple stable branches of a collection, we should focus testing on the minimum required ansible-core version and the next one or two higher versions. For example, if `stable-10` has `requires_ansible >= 2.18`, `stable-9` has `requires_ansible >= 2.16`, and `stable-8(ELS)` has `requires_ansible >= 2.15`, we would test against:

	- `stable-10`: ansible-core versions 2.18 and 2.19.
    
	- `stable-9`: ansible-core versions 2.16 and 2.17.
    

>  -  ELS branches (`stable-8`) should run tests primarily on-demand or in response to specific issues.

Reviewer: This example conflicts with the test matrix above.

   - Weekly scheduled tests will target the `released` AAP version (`unrealeased_next`) with the second stable collection version.
   - Downstream integration tests can be triggered manually by the collection on-demand jenkins pipeline with a selected collection stable branch and AAP version. 
  

 | Test Type   | When Run         | AAP versions(supprted Ansible-Core)       | Collection Versions  |
 | ----------- | ---------------- | ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
 | Downstream Integration      | Nightly   | Latest unreleased AAP (devel)  | Latest stable
 | Downstream Integration      | Weekly    | Released AAP (unrealeased_next)   | Second stable     |
 | Downstream Integration | On-Demand | Selected AAP | Selected Collection

5. **Recommendations:**
       
   - Sanity tests: Broadest range; run on all supported versions.

   -  Unit tests: Focus on latest stable and devel.

   -  Integration tests:

        -  Run on **latest + devel** on PRs.

        -  Run on **older supported versions** (e.g., latest 2-3) in scheduled CI (nightly/weekly).

>         -  ELS-branch-supported versions tested when issues arise. Refer: [ELS Support](../ELS_support.md)

Reviewer: Do we need this? The upstream test matrix already covers this in better detail.

| Sanity      | PRs, nightly or periodic jobs | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches$^1$ for nightly or periodic jobs$^1$ | `devel` and all supported versions in `requires_ansible`                              |
| Unit        | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches$^1$ for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all supported versions in `requires_ansible` |
| Integration | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches$^1$ for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all supported versions in `requires_ansible` |
_$^1$ latest major release of the collection and two prior versions_

**Example Scenario :**

Consider amazon.aws collection where `stable-10` has `requires_ansible >= 2.18`, `stable-9` has `requires_ansible >= 2.16`, and `stable-8` has `requires_ansible >= 2.15`. In this case, the testing matrix should ensure the following:

- Nightly/weekly sanity, unit, and integration tests are run on all three stable ansible-core version.
    

> - Each collection branch should be tested only against ansible-core versions compatible with its declared `requires_ansible`. For example, `stable-10` CI should test against ansible-core 2.18+, `stable-9` CI should test against ansible-core 2.16 and 2.17, while `stable-8` should include only 2.15.

Author: I’ve explicitly mentioned `stable-8` as an example for ELS and have made the necessary correction.

    
- ELS branches (if any) should run tests primarily on-demand or in response to specific issues.
    
**Handling Version Overlap in the Testing Matrix**

When managing multiple stable branches of a collection, care should be taken to avoid redundant or unnecessary testing across ansible-core versions. For example, if `stable-10` has `requires_ansible >= 2.18`, `stable-9` has `requires_ansible >= 2.16`, and `stable-8` has `requires_ansible >= 2.15`, each branch should focus testing only on its relevant minimum version and forward. `Stable-8` does not need to test on ansible-core 2.16 through 2.19, as these versions exceed its compatibility range and may introduce changes that are incompatible or irrelevant. Instead, its test matrix can be restricted to run only against ansible-core 2.15. This approach keeps CI efficient and scoped while maintaining coverage for declared compatibility ranges.

**Maintainer Responsibilities:**

Collection maintainers are expected to:

- Define and update `requires_ansible` accurately in `meta/runtime.yml` for each release.
    
- Implement and maintain CI coverage across declared versions of ansible-core.
    

> - Monitor PRs and nightly/weekly job results to identify regressions or breaking changes.

Author: Yes, I agree with you.  I’ve created a spike Jira ticket to explore options and define a process for regularly checking CI results

    
- Monitor PRs and nightly/weekly job results to identify regressions or breaking changes.
    
- Address issues through timely bug fixes, enhancements, or [backports](https://github.com/ansible-collections/cloud-content-handbook/blob/main/backport_changes.md) to stable branches.

### **ansible-core and Collection Dependencies**

1. **Version Compatibility:**

	- Each collection must define a minimum supported ansible-core version using the `requires_ansible` field in `meta/runtime.yml`.
     
	- The **latest major version** of a collection should support at least the **latest two stable versions** of ansible-core.
    
	- Support for the other ansible-core versions (needed by AAP) can be maintained in **separate stable branches** of the collection (e.g., `stable-8`, `stable-9`), depending on usage, product needs, and team capacity.
	
	This approach allows us to balance compatibility with upstream/downstream needs while keeping maintenance manageable.

        
2. **Upstream testing Strategy:**
    
    - Collections should maintain CI pipelines that test against multiple versions of ansible-core.
        

>     - PR-based testing should focus on the latest stable and development versions.

Author: Corrected.

        
    - Weekly scheduled tests should cover a broader range of supported ansible-core versions to catch regressions.

3. **Upstream testing Matrix**

  Different types of tests may target different subsets of the ansible-core versions based on their purpose and cost:

 | Test Type   | When Run                      | Collection Branch                                                                                        | ansible-core Versions                                                                 |
 | ----------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

>  | Sanity      | PRs, nightly or periodic jobs | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for nightly or periodic jobs | `devel` and all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest                             |

Author: Replaced `periodic` with `weekly`

 | Unit        | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest|

>  | Integration | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest|

Reviewer 2: | Test Type   | When Run                 | Collection Branch                         | ansible-core Versions                                      |
| ----------- | ------------------------ | ----------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| Sanity      | PRs                      | Branch on which the PR is submitted       | `devel` and all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest |
| Sanity      | Nightly or periodic jobs | All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> | `devel` and all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest |
| Unit        | PRs                      | Branch on which the PR is submitted       | Latest version and `devel`                                 |
| Unit        | Weekly Jobs              | All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> | All versions from `requires_ansible` to latest             |
| Integration | PRs                      | Branch on which the PR is submitted       | Latest version and `devel`                                 |
| Integration | Weekly Jobs              | All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> | All versions from `requires_ansible` to latest             |

Reviewer 2: I would suggest splitting each type of run into its own row to make this easier to read.

Also, I think we currently test against the `milestone` ansible-core version as well, do we want to include that in this matrix?

- `stable-10` has `requires_ansible >= 2.18`
- `stable-9` has `requires_ansible >= 2.16`
- `stable-8` (ELS) has `requires_ansible >= 2.15`

#### Sanity Tests

- **On PRs:**
  - Run on the branch where the PR is submitted.
  - Test against `ansible-core`:
    - `devel`
    - All versions from `requires_ansible` up to the latest
      _e.g., for `stable-10`, that would be 2.18 through latest_

- **Periodic Jobs:**
  - Run on all supported stable collection branches  
    _(latest two major versions: `stable-10`, `stable-9`)_
  - Test against `ansible-core`:
    - `devel`
    - All versions from `requires_ansible` to latest for each branch

#### Unit and Integration Tests

- **On PRs:**
  - Run on the branch where the PR is submitted.
  - Test against `ansible-core`:
    - Latest 
    - `devel`

- **Periodic Jobs:**
  - Run on all supported stable branches  
    _(latest two major versions: `stable-10`, `stable-9`)_
  - Test against `ansible-core`:
    - `devel`
    - All versions from `requires_ansible` to latest for each branch

#### ELS Branches (`stable-8`)
- Not included in regular scheduled jobs.

> - Tests are triggered **on-demand**, such as:

Reviewer 2: When we trigger these tests, what ansible-core version(s) are we running them against?

Author: Added the ansible-core version

  - Specific bug fixes
  - Security patches
  - Customer support requirements

4. **Downstream Integration Testing Matrix**

>   Downstream Integration tests will run against ansible-core that is supported by the AAP version.

Reviewer 2: This reads to me like we don't intend to test our collections downstream until after they are released? (ie, we are never testing the development branch). Is that correct?

>    - Nightly downstream integration tests will target the latest AAP `unreleased` version(`devel`) with the latest stable collection version(`main`).

Reviewer 2: `main` isn't the latest stable collection version, it's the development branch for collections.

Reviewer 3: Update the nightly tests to use the latest collection development branch.

   - Weekly scheduled tests will target the `released` AAP version (`unrealeased_next`) with the second stable collection version.

>    - Downstream integration tests can be triggered manually by the collection on-demand jenkins pipeline with a selected collection stable branch and AAP version. 

Reviewer 2: So we could do this when releasing a bugfix for an ELS branch by targeting, say, `stable-8` and `AAP 2.4` (or whatever the relevant combo is)?

  

 | Test Type   | When Run         | AAP versions(supprted Ansible-Core)       | Collection Versions  |
 | ----------- | ---------------- | ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
 | Downstream Integration      | Nightly   | Latest unreleased AAP (devel)  | Latest stable
 | Downstream Integration      | Weekly    | Released AAP (unrealeased_next)   | Second stable     |
 | Downstream Integration | On-Demand | Selected AAP | Selected Collection

           

### **Process for Managing Compatibility Issues**

> 1. Regular monitoring of test failures across different versions.

Reviewer 2: Do we have an idea of what we want this process to look like? How will we as a team review and handle test failures for nightly/weekly test jobs?

**Proposal: Managing ansible-core and Collection Dependencies**

### **Introduction**

Managing dependencies between ansible-core and Collections is critical for maintaining compatibility, reducing testing burdens, and ensuring smooth upgrades. This document outlines the approach to handling dependencies, testing strategies, and considerations for version support.

### **ansible-core and Collection Dependencies**

1. **Version Compatibility:**
    

>     - Each collection should define a supported range of ansible-core versions.

Reviewer: What are the guidelines for choosing that range of supported versions?

>     - Major releases of collections should align with stable ansible-core versions.

Author: By stable, I mean the versions of ansible-core other than devel. I shall reword it for more clarity.

        
2. **Testing Strategy:**
    

>     - Collections should maintain CI pipelines that test against multiple versions of ansible-core.

Reviewer: Which versions? And which tests should be run for those versions? Right now, we do not run integration tests on the same matrix of ansible-core versions as we do for sanity tests. Should sanity/unit/integration tests all have the same ansible-core test matrix, or should they be different?

Author: For the supported version of ansible-core

Would it make sense to follow the [ansible-core support matrix](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/release_and_maintenance.html#ansible-core-support-matrix) for identifying supported ansible-core versions, while also maintaining separate stable branches for ansible-core versions included in the latest or ELS AAP packages—even if those versions are no longer supported according to the timeline in the document?

Reviewer: > while also maintaining separate stable branches for ansible-core versions included in the latest or ELS AAP packages

We don't maintain branches for ansible-core versions, we maintain branches for a collection version. Those collection versions have an ansible-core version specified in the `requires_ansible`.

        
    - PR-based testing should focus on the latest stable and development versions.
        
    - Weekly scheduled tests should cover a broader range of supported ansible-core versions to catch regressions.
        

### **amazon.aws Collection Specific Strategy**

Considering the **amazon.aws** collection, the dependency management and testing strategy is as follows:

1. **Version Support:**
    
    - The new **amazon.aws 10.0.0** will support **ansible-core 2.17+**.
        
    - The **stable-9** branch will support **ansible-core 2.15+**.
        
2. **Integration Testing Approach:**
    
    - **For stable-10:**
        
        - Run integration tests on PRs against **ansible-core 2.19** and **devel**.
            
        - Weekly tests against **ansible-core 2.17** and **2.18**.
            
    - **For stable-9:**
        
        - PR-based integration tests against **ansible-core 2.16** for backports.
            

>         - **ansible-core 2.15** will be tested when issues are filed.

Author: I plan to generalize the current matrix by removing amazon.aws-specific details and creating a version that can be applied across all collections. This matrix will be designed by balancing practical and strategic priorities such as CI resource efficiency, version support policies, test type objectives, and downstream testing requirements.

            

### **Process for Managing Compatibility Issues**

1. Regular monitoring of test failures across different versions.
    

> 2. Establishing a process for identifying and addressing regressions introduced by ansible-core updates.

Reviewer: How do we do these?

Author: While failures due to ansible-core updates are not encountered often in cloud content tests, it’s still valuable to have a process in place. This includes regularly testing with devel, tagging and tracking regressions, collaborating with the Core team, and clearly communicating issues when they arise. I shall add that in the document.

 | ----------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
 | Sanity      | PRs, nightly or periodic jobs | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for nightly or periodic jobs | `devel` and all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest                             |
 | Unit        | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest|
 | Integration | PRs, Weekly Jobs              | Branch on which the PR is submitted ; All supported stable branches<sup>1</sup> for Weekly jobs                  | Latest version, devel (on PR); Weekly on all versions from `requires_ansible` to latest|

 <sup>1</sup> _collection's latest two major versions_

 **Example Scenario :**

>  - When managing multiple stable branches of a collection, we should focus testing on the minimum required ansible-core version and the next one or two higher versions. For example, if `stable-10` has `requires_ansible >= 2.18`, `stable-9` has `requires_ansible >= 2.16`, and `stable-8(ELS)` has `requires_ansible >= 2.15`, we would test against:

Reviewer: I still feel like this conflicts with what's in the test matrix. In your example, if I follow the test matrix, I would do sanity testing on PRs for stable-9 with 2.16, 2.17, 2.18 and 2.19.

Author: My bad! I didnot consider all tests. I’ve expanded the example scenario to include additional details.

    - Major releases of collections should align with officially released and actively supported versions of ansible-core. These supported versions can be determined by referencing [Red Hat’s Ansible Automation Platform life cycle policy](https://access.redhat.com/support/policy/updates/ansible-automation-platform#dates). Specifically, the “Maintenance Support 2” end date indicates the end of life (EOL). The ansible-core versions supported in the corresponding AAP releases should be considered when defining the minimum `requires_ansible` value.

        
2.  **Guidelines for Choosing the Supported  of ansible-core Versions:**
    
           
    - Support at least the **latest two stable versions** of ansible-core in the **latest major version** of the collection.
        
    - Maintain **separate branches** (such as stable-8, stable-7) to support older ansible-core versions that are part of the **ELS (Extended Lifecycle Support)** program.
        
    - Drop older ansible-core versions when they reach EOL.
        
    - Ensure `requires_ansible` is updated in `meta/runtime.yml` during a new major release when older ansible-core versions are no longer supported.
        

>     - When planning long-term support, **plan for** ansible-core versions used in downstream products (e.g., AAP). This may involve maintaining separate major version branches for compatibility (e.g., `stable-8` for AAP 2.4), running periodic CI jobs to validate against those versions, and ensuring fixes are backported as needed to branches that align with supported AAP releases.

Reviewer: > However, the decision to continue supporting a branch should depend on actual usage, product needs, and the team’s capacity.

But what does "support" mean? I'm less interested in a document that says what we support and more interested in a document that defines what our requirements are as collection maintainers. If support means that we fix a bug when a customer files an escalation and we decide it's reasonable to do so, then what we support is kind of meaningless. If support means that we regularly run sanity tests on 5 different versions of ansible-core, then that means a whole lot.

>     - When planning long-term support, **plan for** ansible-core versions used in downstream products (e.g., AAP). This may involve maintaining separate major version branches for compatibility (e.g., `stable-8` for AAP 2.4), running periodic CI jobs to validate against those versions, and ensuring fixes are backported as needed to branches that align with supported AAP releases.

Author: I've added the Maintainer Responsibilities section and an example scenario. Let me know what you think. The best-effort support approach for ELS branches is exaplined with an example in the ELS-support document.

    - Prioritize versions used in downstream products (e.g., AAP) when planning long-term support (separate branches or separate periodic CI pipelines for testing).
    
3. **Testing Strategy:**
    
    - Collections should maintain CI pipelines that test against multiple versions of ansible-core.
        
    - PR-based testing should focus on the latest stable and development versions.
        
    - Weekly scheduled tests should cover a broader range of supported ansible-core versions to catch regressions.

**Testing Matrix**

  Different types of tests may target different subsets of the Ansible Core versions based on their purpose and cost:

| Test Type   | When Run         | Ansible-Core Versions                                 |
| ----------- | ---------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| Sanity      | PRs, Scheduled   | All supported versions in `requires_ansible`          |
| Unit        | PRs              | Latest stable, devel                                  |

> | Integration | PRs, Weekly Jobs | Latest stable, devel (on PR); broader set on schedule |

Reviewer: What is the difference between scheduled and weekly?

**Downstream Integration Testing Matrix**

  Downstream Integration tests will run against ansible-core that is supported by the AAP version.

>   - Nightly downstream integration tests will target the latest AAP version(Devel) with the latest stable collection version(main).
>   - Weekly scheduled tests will target the current AAP unrealeased_next version with the second stable collection version.
>   - Downstream integration tests can be triggered manually by the collection on-demand jenkins pipeline with a selected collection stable branch and AAP version. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Nightly downstream integration tests will target the latest AAP version (`devel`) with the latest stable collection version (`main`).
  - Weekly scheduled tests will target the current AAP `unrealeased_next` version with the second stable collection version.
  - Downstream integration tests can be triggered manually by the collection on-demand jenkins pipeline with a selected collection stable branch and AAP version. 
```

Reviewer 3: Update: The Nightly tests will target the latest `unreleased` AAP version.
Highlight the AAP versions and branch.
